<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>The Grant Dictations</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section data-parent="volume-1" id="the-grant-dictations" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Grant Dictations</h3>
				<p>1885</p>
			</header>
			<section id="the-chicago-gar-festival">
				<header>
					<h4 epub:type="subtitle">The Chicago <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">G.A.R.</abbr> Festival</h4>
					<p class="date">Dictated in 1885</p>
				</header>
				<p>The first time I ever saw General Grant was in the fall or winter of 1866 at one of the receptions at Washington, when he was general of the army. I merely saw and shook hands with him along with the crowd, but had no conversation. It was there, also, that I first saw General Sheridan.</p>
				<p>I next saw General Grant during his first term as President. Senator Bill Stewart, of Nevada, proposed to take me in and see the President. We found him in his working costume, with an old, short, linen duster on, and it was well spattered with ink. I had acquired some trifle of notoriety through some letters which I had written, in the New York <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Tribune</i>, during my trip round about the world in the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.boat">Quaker City</i> expedition. I shook hands, and then there was a pause and silence. I couldn’t think of anything to say. So I merely looked into the general’s grim, immovable countenance a moment or two, in silence, and then I said: “<abbr>Mr.</abbr> President, I am embarrassed. Are you?” He smiled a smile which would have done no discredit to a cast-iron image, and I got away under the smoke of my volley.</p>
				<p>I did not see him again for some ten years. In the meantime I had become very thoroughly notorious.</p>
				<p>Then, in 1879, the general had just returned from his journey through the European and Asiatic world, and his progress from San Francisco eastward had been one continuous ovation; and now he was to be feasted in Chicago by the veterans of the Army of the Tennessee⁠—the first army over which he had had command. The preparations for this occasion were in keeping with the importance of it. The toast committee telegraphed me and asked me if I would be present and respond at the grand banquet to the toast to the ladies. I telegraphed back that the toast was worn out. Everything had been said about the ladies that could be said at a banquet, but there was one class of the community that had always been overlooked upon such occasions and if they would allow me I would take that class for a toast⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Babies</i>. They were willing, so I prepared my toast and went out to Chicago.</p>
				<p>There was to be a prodigious procession. General Grant was to review it from a rostrum which had been built out for the purpose from the second-story window of the Palmer House. The rostrum was carpeted and otherwise glorified with flags and so on.</p>
				<p>The best place of all to see the procession was, of course, from this rostrum, so I sauntered upon that rostrum, while as yet it was empty, in the hope that I might be permitted to sit there. It was rather a conspicuous place, since upon it the public gaze was fixed and there was a countless multitude below. Presently two gentlemen came upon that platform from the window of the hotel and stepped forward to the front. A prodigious shout went up from the vast multitude below, and I recognized in one of these two gentlemen General Grant; the other was Carter Harrison, the Mayor of Chicago, with whom I was acquainted. He saw me, stepped over to me, and said wouldn’t I like to be introduced to the general? I said I should. So he walked over with me and said, “General, let me introduce <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Clemens.” We shook hands. There was the usual momentary pause, and then the general said: “I am not embarrassed. Are you?”</p>
				<p>It showed that he had a good memory for trifles as well as for serious things.</p>
				<p>That banquet was by all odds the most notable one I was ever present at. There were six hundred persons present, mainly veterans of the Army of the Tennessee, and that in itself would have made it a most notable occasion of the kind in my experience, but there were other things which contributed. General Sherman, and in fact nearly all of the surviving great generals of the war, sat in a body on a dais round about General Grant.</p>
				<p>The speakers were of a rare celebrity and ability.</p>
				<p>That night I heard for the first time a slang expression which had already come into considerable vogue, but I had not myself heard it before.</p>
				<p>When the speaking began about ten o’clock, I left my place at the table and went away over to the front side of the great dining room, where I could take in the whole spectacle at one glance. Among others, Colonel Vilas was to respond to a toast, and also Colonel Ingersoll, the silver-tongued infidel, who had begun life in Illinois and was exceedingly popular there. Vilas was from Wisconsin and was very famous as an orator. He had prepared himself superbly for this occasion.</p>
				<p>He was about the first speaker on the list of fifteen toasts, and Bob Ingersoll was the ninth.</p>
				<p>I had taken a position upon the steps in front of the brass band, which lifted me up and gave me a good general view. Presently I noticed, leaning against the wall near me, a simple-looking young man wearing the uniform of a private and the badge of the Army of the Tennessee. He seemed to be nervous and ill at ease about something; presently, while the second speaker was talking, this young man said, “Do you know Colonel Vilas?” I said I had been introduced to him. He sat silent awhile and then said, “They say he is hell when he gets started!”</p>
				<p>I said: “In what way? What do you mean?”</p>
				<p>“Speaking! Speaking! They say he is lightning!”</p>
				<p>“Yes,” I said, “I have heard that he is a great speaker.”</p>
				<p>The young man shifted about uneasily for a while, and then he said, “Do you reckon he can get away with Bob Ingersoll?”</p>
				<p>I said, “I don’t know.”</p>
				<p>Another pause. Occasionally he and I would join in the applause when a speaker was on his legs, but this young man seemed to applaud unconsciously.</p>
				<p>Presently he said, “Here, in Illinois, we think there can’t nobody get away with Bob Ingersoll.”</p>
				<p>I said, “Is that so?”</p>
				<p>He said, “Yes; we don’t think anybody can lay over Bob Ingersoll.” Then he added sadly, “But they do say that Vilas is pretty nearly hell.”</p>
				<p>At last Vilas rose to speak, and this young man pulled himself together and put on all his anxiety. Vilas began to warm up and the people began to applaud. He delivered himself of one especially fine passage and there was a general shout: “Get up on the table! Get up on the table! Stand up on the table! We can’t see you!” So a lot of men standing there picked Vilas up and stood him on the table in full view of the whole great audience, and he went on with his speech. The young man applauded with the rest, and I could hear the young fellow mutter without being able to make out what he said. But presently, when Vilas thundered out something especially fine, there was a tremendous outburst from the whole house, and then this young man said, in a sort of despairing way:</p>
				<p>“It ain’t no use. Bob can’t climb up to that!”</p>
				<p>During the next hour he held his position against the wall in a sort of dazed abstraction, apparently unconscious of place or anything else, and at last, when Ingersoll mounted the supper table, his worshiper merely straightened up to an attitude of attention, but without manifesting any hope.</p>
				<p>Ingersoll, with his fair and fresh complexion, handsome figure, and graceful carriage, was beautiful to look at.</p>
				<p>He was to respond to the toast of “The Volunteers,” and his first sentence or two showed his quality. As his third sentence fell from his lips the house let go with a crash and my private looked pleased and for the first time hopeful, but he had been too much frightened to join in the applause. Presently, when Ingersoll came to the passage in which he said that these volunteers had shed their blood and periled their lives in order that a mother might own her own child, the language was so fine, whatever it was (for I have forgotten), and the delivery was so superb that the vast multitude rose as one man and stood on their feet, shouting, stamping, and filling all the place with such a waving of napkins that it was like a snowstorm. This prodigious outburst continued for a minute or two, Ingersoll standing and waiting. And now I happened to notice my private. He was stamping, clapping, shouting, gesticulating like a man who had gone truly mad. At last, when quiet was restored once more, he glanced up at me with the tears in his eyes and said:</p>
				<p>“Egod! <em>He didn’t</em> get left!”</p>
				<p>My own speech was granted the perilous distinction of the place of honor. It was the last speech on the list, an honor which no person, probably, has ever sought. It was not reached until two o’clock in the morning. But when I got on my feet I knew that there was at any rate one point in my favor: the text was bound to have the sympathy of nine-tenths of the men present, and of every woman, married or single, of the crowds of the sex who stood huddled in the various doorways.</p>
				<p>I expected the speech to go off well⁠—and it did.</p>
				<p>In it I had a drive at General Sheridan’s comparatively new twins and various other things calculated to make it go. There was only one thing in it that I had fears about, and that one thing stood where it could not be removed in case of disaster.</p>
				<p>It was the last sentence in the speech.</p>
				<p>I had been picturing the America of fifty years hence, with a population of two hundred million souls, and was saying that the future President, admiral, and so forth, of that great coming time were now lying in their various cradles, scattered abroad over the vast expanse of this country, and then said “and now in his cradle somewhere under the flag the future illustrious commander-in-chief of the American armies is so little burdened with his approaching grandeur and responsibilities as to be giving his whole strategic mind at this moment to trying to find some way to get his big toe into his mouth⁠—something, meaning no disrespect to the illustrious guest of this evening, which he turned his entire attention to some fifty-six years ago⁠—”</p>
				<p>And here, as I had expected, the laughter ceased and a sort of shuddering silence took its place⁠—for this was apparently carrying the matter too far.</p>
				<p>I waited a moment or two to let this silence sink well home, then, turning toward the general, I added:</p>
				<p>“And if the child is but the father of the man there are mighty few who will doubt that he succeeded.”</p>
				<p>Which relieved the house, for when they saw the general break up in good-sized pieces they followed suit with great enthusiasm.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="grant-and-the-chinese">
				<header>
					<h4 epub:type="title">Grant and the Chinese</h4>
					<p class="date">Dictated in 1885</p>
				</header>
				<p>Early in 1884, or late in 1883, if my memory serves me, I called on General Grant with Yung Wing, late Chinese minister at Washington, to introduce Wing and let him lay before General Grant a proposition. Li Hung-Chang, one of the greatest and most progressive men in China since the death of Prince Kung, had been trying to persuade the imperial government to build a system of military railroads in China, and had so far succeeded in his persuasions that a majority of the government were willing to consider the matter⁠—provided that money could be obtained for that purpose outside of China, this money to be raised upon the customs of the country and by bonding the railway, or in some such manner. Yung Wing believed that if General Grant would take charge of the matter here and create the syndicate, the money would be easily forthcoming. He also knew that General Grant was better and more favorably known in China than any other foreigner in the world, and was aware that if his name were associated with the enterprise⁠—the syndicate⁠—it would inspire the Chinese government and people and give them the greatest possible sense of security. We found the general cooped up in his room with a severe rheumatism, resulting from a fall on the ice which he had got some months before. He would not undertake a syndicate, because times were so hard here that people would be loath to invest money so far away; of course Yung Wing’s proposal included a liberal compensation for General Grant for his trouble, but that was a thing that the general would not listen to for a moment. He said that easier times would come by and by, and that the money could then be raised, no doubt, and that he would enter into it cheerfully and with zeal and carry it through to the very best of his ability, but he must do it without compensation. In no case would he consent to take any money for it. Here, again, he manifested the very strongest interest in China, an interest which I had seen him evince on previous occasions. He said he had urged a system of railways on Li Hung-Chang when he was in China, and he now felt so sure that such a system would be a great salvation for the country, and also the beginning of the country’s liberation from the Tartar rule and thralldom, that he would be quite willing at a favorable time to do everything he could toward carrying out that project, without other compensation than the pleasure he would derive from being useful to China.</p>
				<p>This reminds me of one other circumstance.</p>
				<p>About 1879 or 1880 the Chinese pupils in Hartford and other New England towns had been ordered home by the Chinese government. There were two parties in the Chinese government⁠—one headed by Li Hung-Chang, the progressive party, which was striving to introduce Western arts and education into China; the other was opposed to all progressive measures. Li Hung-Chang and the progressive party kept the upper hand for some time, and during this period the government had sent one hundred or more of the country’s choicest youth over here to be educated. But now the other party had got the upper hand and had ordered these young people home. At this time an old Chinaman named Quong, non-progressionist, was the chief China minister at Washington, and Yung Wing was his assistant. The order disbanding the schools was a great blow to Yung Wing, who had spent many years in working for their establishment. This order came upon him with the suddenness of a thunderclap. He did not know which way to turn.</p>
				<p>First, he got a petition signed by the presidents of various American colleges, setting forth the great progress that the Chinese pupils had made and offering arguments to show why the pupils should be allowed to remain to finish their education. This paper was to be conveyed to the Chinese government through the minister at Peking. But Yung Wing felt the need of a more powerful voice in the matter, and General Grant occurred to him. He thought that if he could get General Grant’s great name added to that petition, that alone would outweigh the signatures of a thousand college professors. So the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Twichell and I went down to New York to see the general. I introduced <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Twichell, who had come with a careful speech for the occasion, in which he intended to load the general with information concerning the Chinese pupils and the Chinese question generally. But he never got the chance to deliver it. The general took the word out of his mouth and talked straight ahead, and easily revealed to Twichell the fact that the general was master of the whole matter and needed no information from anybody, and also the fact that he was brimful of interest in the matter. Now, as always, the general was not only ready to do what we asked of him, but a hundred times more. He said, yes, he would sign that paper, if desired, but he would do better than that: he would write a personal letter to Li Hung-Chang, and do it immediately. So Twichell and I went downstairs into the lobby of the Fifth Avenue Hotel, a crowd of waiting and anxious visitors sitting in the anteroom, and in the course of half an hour he sent for us again and put into our hands his letter to Li Hung-Chang, to be sent directly and without the intervention of the American minister, or anyone else. It was a clear, compact, and admirably written statement of the case of the Chinese pupils, with some equally clear arguments to show that the breaking up of the schools would be a mistake. We shipped the letter and prepared to wait a couple of months to see what the result would be.</p>
				<p>But we had not to wait so long. The moment the general’s letter reached China a telegram came back from the Chinese government, which was almost a copy, in detail, of General Grant’s letter, and the cablegram ended with the peremptory command to old Minister Wong to continue the Chinese schools.</p>
				<p>It was a marvelous exhibition of the influence of a private citizen of one country over the counsels of an Empire situated on the other side of the globe.</p>
				<p>Such an influence could have been wielded by no other citizen in the world outside of that Empire; in fact, the policy of the imperial government had been reversed from Room 45, Fifth Avenue Hotel, New York, by a private citizen of the United States.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-call-with-w-d-howells-on-general-grant">
				<header>
					<h4 epub:type="title">A Call with <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. D.</abbr> Howells on General Grant</h4>
					<p class="date">Dictated in 1885</p>
				</header>
				<p>Howells wrote me that his old father, who was well along in the seventies, was in great distress about his poor little consulate up in Quebec. Somebody, not being satisfied with the degree of poverty already conferred upon him by a thoughtful and beneficent Providence, was anxious to add to it by acquiring the Quebec consulate. So Howells thought if we could get General Grant to say a word to President Arthur it might have the effect of stopping this effort to oust old <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Howells from his position. Therefore, at my suggestion Howells came down, and we went to New York to lay the matter before the general. We found him at <abbr>No.</abbr> 2 Wall Street, in the principal office of Grant &amp; Ward, brokers.</p>
				<p>I stated the case and asked him if he wouldn’t write a word on a card which Howells could carry to Washington and hand to the President.</p>
				<p>But, as usual, General Grant was his natural self⁠—that is to say, ready and also determined to do a great deal more for you than you could possibly have the effrontery to ask him to do. Apparently he never meets anybody halfway; he comes nine-tenths of the way himself voluntarily. “No,” he said, he would do better than that, and cheerfully; he was going to Washington in a couple of days to dine with the President and he would speak to him and make it a personal matter. Now, as General Grant not only never forgets a promise, but never even the shadow of a promise, he did as he said he would do, and within a week came a letter from the Secretary of State, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Frelinghuysen, to say that in no case would old <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Howells be disturbed. And he wasn’t. He resigned a couple of years later.</p>
				<p>But to go back to the interview with General Grant, he was in a humor to talk⁠—in fact, he was always in a humor to talk when no strangers were present⁠—and he resisted all our efforts to leave him.</p>
				<p>He forced us to stay and take luncheon in a private room and continued to talk all the time. (It was bacon and beans. Nevertheless, “How he sits and towers”⁠—Howells, quoting from Dante.)</p>
				<p>He remembered “Squibob” Derby at West Point very well. He said that Derby was forever drawing caricatures of the professors and playing jokes of all kinds on everybody. He also told of one thing, which I had heard before but which I have never seen in print. At West Point, the professor was instructing and questioning a class concerning certain particulars of a possible siege, and he said this, as nearly as I can remember. I cannot quote General Grant’s words:</p>
				<p>Given: that a thousand men are besieging a fortress whose equipment of men, provisions, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, are so-and-so⁠—it is a military axiom that at the end of forty-five days the fort will surrender. Now, young men, if any of you were in command of such a fortress, how would you proceed?</p>
				<p>Derby held up his hand in token that he had an answer for that question. He said, “I would march out, let the enemy in, and at the end of forty-five days I would change places with him.”</p>
				<p>I tried very hard to get General Grant to write his personal memoirs for publication, but he would not listen to the suggestion. His inborn diffidence made him shrink from voluntarily coming forward before the public and placing himself under criticism as an author. He had no confidence in his ability to write well, whereas everybody else in the world, excepting himself, is aware that he possesses an admirable literary gift and style. He was also sure that the book would have no sale, and of course that would be a humiliation, too. He instanced the fact that General Badeau’s military history of General Grant had had but a trifling sale, and that John Russell Young’s account of General Grant’s trip around the globe had hardly any sale at all. But I said that these were not instances in point; that what another man might tell about General Grant was nothing, while what General Grant should tell about himself, with his own pen, was a totally different thing. I said that the book would have an enormous sale; that it should be in two volumes, sold, in cash, at $3.50 apiece, and that the sale in two volumes would certainly reach half a million sets. I said that, from my experience, I could save him from making unwise contracts with publishers, and could also suggest the best plan of publication⁠—the subscription plan⁠—and find for him the best men in that line of business.</p>
				<p>I had in my mind at that time the American Publishing Company, of Hartford, and, while I suspected that they had been swindling me for ten years, I was well aware that I could arrange the contract in such a way that they could not swindle General Grant. But the general said that he had no necessity for any addition to his income. I knew that he meant by that that his investments, through the firm in which his sons were partners, were paying him all the money he needed. So I was not able to persuade him to write a book. He said that some day he would make very full notes and leave them behind him; and then, if his children chose to make them into a book, that would answer.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="about-general-grants-memoirs">
				<header>
					<h4 epub:type="title">About General Grant’s “Memoirs”</h4>
					<p class="date">Dictated in 1883</p>
				</header>
				<p>I want to set down somewhat of a history of General Grant’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Memoirs</i>.</p>
				<p>By way of preface I will make a remark or two indirectly connected therewith.</p>
				<p>During the Garfield campaign Grant threw the whole weight of his influence and endeavor toward the triumph of the Republican party. He made a progress through many of the states, chiefly the doubtful ones, and this progress was a daily and nightly ovation as long as it lasted. He was received everywhere by prodigious multitudes of enthusiastic people, and, to strain the facts a little, one might almost tell what part of the country the general was in, for the moment, by the red reflections on the sky caused by the torch processions and fireworks.</p>
				<p>He was to visit Hartford, from Boston, and I was one of the committee sent to Boston to bring him down here. I was also appointed to introduce him to the Hartford people when the population and the soldiers should pass in review before him. On our way from Boston in the palace car I fell to talking with Grant’s eldest son, <abbr>Col.</abbr> Fred Grant, whom I knew very well, and it gradually came out that the general, so far from being a rich man, as was commonly supposed, had not even income enough to enable him to live as respectably as a third-rate physician.</p>
				<p>Colonel Grant told me that the general left the White House, at the end of his second term, a poor man, and I think he said he was in debt, but I am not positively sure (I know he was in debt $45,000, at the end of <em>one</em> of his terms). Friends had given the general a couple of dwelling houses, but he was not able to keep them or live in either of them. This was all so shameful and such a reproach to Congress that I proposed to take the general’s straitened circumstances as my text in introducing him to the people of Hartford.</p>
				<p>I knew that if this nation, which was rising up daily to do its chief citizen unparalleled honor, had it in its power, by its vote, to decide the matter, it would turn his poverty into immeasurable wealth in an instant. Therefore the reproach lay not with the people, but with their political representatives in Congress, and my speech could be no insult to the people.</p>
				<p>I clove to my plan, and in introducing the general I referred to the dignities and emoluments lavished upon the Duke of Wellington by England and contrasted with that conduct our far finer and higher method toward the savior of our country⁠—to wit, the simple carrying him in our hearts without burdening him with anything to live on.</p>
				<p>In his reply the general, of course, said that this country had more than sufficiently rewarded him and that he was well satisfied.</p>
				<p>He could not have said anything else, necessarily.</p>
				<p>A few months later I could not have made such a speech, for by that time certain wealthy citizens had privately made up a purse of a quarter of a million dollars for the general, and had invested it in such a way that he could not be deprived of it either by his own want of wisdom or the rascality of other people.</p>
				<p>Later still, the firm of Grant &amp; Ward, brokers and stock dealers, was established at <abbr>No.</abbr> 2 Wall Street, New York City.</p>
				<p>This firm consisted of General Grant’s sons and a brisk young man by the name of Ferdinand Ward. The general was also, in some way, a partner, but did not take any active part in the business of the house.</p>
				<p>In a little time the business had grown to such proportions that it was apparently not only profitable, but it was prodigiously so.</p>
				<p>The truth was, however, that Ward was robbing all the Grants and everybody else that he could get his hands on, and the firm was not making a penny.</p>
				<p>The general was unsuspicious and supposed that he was making a vast deal of money, whereas, indeed, he was simply losing such as he had, for Ward was getting it.</p>
				<p>About the 5th of May, I think it was, 1884, the crash came and the several Grant families found themselves absolutely penniless.</p>
				<p>Ward had even captured the interest due on the quarter of a million dollars of the Grant fund, which interest had fallen due only a day or two before the failure.</p>
				<p>General Grant told me that that month, <em>for the first time in his life</em>, he had paid his domestic bills with <em>checks</em>. They came back upon his hands dishonored. He told me that Ward had spared no one connected with the Grant name, however remote⁠—that he had taken all that the general could scrape together and $45,000 that the general had borrowed on his wife’s dwelling house in New York; that he had taken $65,000, the sum for which <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Grant had sold, recently, one of the houses which had been presented to the general; that he had taken $7,000, which some poverty-stricken nieces of his in the West had recently received by bequest, and which was all the money they had in the world⁠—that, in a word, Ward had utterly stripped everybody connected with the Grant family.</p>
				<p>It was necessary that something be immediately done toward getting bread.</p>
				<p>The bill to restore to General Grant the title and emoluments of a full general in the army, on the retired list, had been lagging for a long time in Congress⁠—in the characteristic, contemptible, and stingy congressional fashion. No relief was to be looked for from that source, mainly because Congress chose to avenge on General Grant the veto of the Fitz-John Porter bill by President Arthur.</p>
				<p>The editors of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Century Magazine</i>, some months before, conceived the excellent idea of getting the surviving heroes of the late Civil War, on both sides, to write out their personal reminiscences of the war and publish them, now, in the magazine. But the happy project had come to grief, for the reason that some of these heroes were quite willing to write out these things only under one condition, that they insisted was essential: they refused to write a line unless the leading actor of the war should also write.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4" id="noteref-4" epub:type="noteref">4</a> All persuasions and arguments failed on General Grant; he would <em>not</em> write. So the scheme fell through.</p>
				<p>Now, however, the complexion of things had changed and General Grant was without bread, not figuratively, but actually.</p>
				<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Century</i> people went to him once more, and now he assented eagerly. A great series of war articles was immediately advertised by the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Century</i> publishers.</p>
				<p>I knew nothing of all this, although I had been a number of times to the general’s house, to pass half an hour, talking and smoking a cigar.</p>
				<p>However, I was reading one night, in Chickering Hall, early in November, 1884, and as my wife and I were leaving the building we stumbled over <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gilder, the editor of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Century</i>, and went home with him to a late supper at his house. We were there an hour or two, and in the course of the conversation Gilder said that General Grant had written three war articles for the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Century</i> and was going to write a fourth. I pricked up my ears.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5" id="noteref-5" epub:type="noteref">5</a> Gilder went on to describe how eagerly General Grant had entertained the proposition to write when it had last been put to him, and how poor he evidently was, and how eager to make some trifle of bread-and-butter money, and how the handing him a check for five hundred dollars for the first article had manifestly gladdened his heart and lifted from it a mighty burden.</p>
				<p>The thing which astounded me was that, admirable man as Gilder certainly is, and with a heart which is in the right place, it had never seemed to occur to him that to offer General Grant five hundred dollars for a magazine article was not only the monumental injustice of the nineteenth century, but of all centuries. He ought to have known that if he had given General Grant a check for ten thousand dollars, the sum would still have been trivial; that if he had paid him twenty thousand dollars for a single article, the sum would still have been inadequate; that if he had paid him thirty thousand dollars for a single magazine war article, it still could not be called paid for; that if he had given him forty thousand dollars for a single magazine article, he would still be in General Grant’s debt. Gilder went on to say that it had been impossible, months before, to get General Grant to write a single line, but that, now that he had once got started, it was going to be as impossible to stop him again; that, in fact, General Grant had set out deliberately to write his memoirs in full, and to publish them in book form.</p>
				<p>I went straight to General Grant’s house next morning and told him what I had heard. He said it was all true.</p>
				<p>I said I had foreseen a fortune in such a book when I had tried, as early as 1881, to get him to write it; that the fortune was just as sure to fall now. I asked him who was to publish the book, and he said doubtless the Century Company.</p>
				<p>I asked him if the contract had been drawn and signed.</p>
				<p>He said it had been drawn in the rough, but not signed yet.</p>
				<p>I said I had had a long and painful experience in book making and publishing, and that if there would be no impropriety in his showing me the rough contract, I believed I might be useful to him.</p>
				<p>He said there was no objection whatever to my seeing the contract, since it had proceeded no further than a mere consideration of its details, without promises given or received on either side. He added that he supposed that the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Century</i> offer was fair and right and that he had been expecting to accept it and conclude the bargain or contract. He read the rough draft aloud, and I didn’t know whether to cry or laugh.</p>
				<p>Whenever a publisher in the “trade” thinks enough of the chances of an unknown author’s book to print it and put it on the market, he is willing to risk paying the man 10-percent royalty, and that is what he does pay him. He can well venture that much of a royalty, but he cannot well venture any more. If that book shall sell 3,000 or 4,000 copies there is no loss on any ordinary book, and both parties have made something; but whenever the sale shall reach 10,000 copies the publisher is getting the lion’s share of the profits and would continue to get the lion’s share as long thereafter as the book should continue to sell.</p>
				<p>When such a book is sure to sell 35,000 copies an author ought to get 15 percent⁠—that is to say, one-half of the net profit; when a book is sure to sell 80,000 or more, he ought to get 20-percent royalty⁠—that is, two-thirds of the total profits.</p>
				<p>Now, here was a book that was morally bound to sell several hundred thousand copies in the first year of its publication, and yet the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Century</i> people had had the hardihood to offer General Grant the very same 10-percent royalty which they would have offered to any unknown Comanche Indian whose book they had reason to believe might sell 3,000 or 4,000 or 5,000 copies.</p>
				<p>If I had not been acquainted with the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Century</i> people I should have said that this was a deliberate attempt to take advantage of a man’s ignorance and trusting nature to rob him; but I do know the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Century</i> people, and therefore I know that they had no such base intentions as these, but were simply making their offer out of their boundless resources of ignorance. They were anxious to do book publishing as well as magazine publishing, and had tried one book already, but, owing to their inexperience, had made a failure of it. So I suppose they were anxious, and had made an offer which in the general’s instance commended itself as reasonable and safe, showing that they were lamentably ignorant and that they utterly failed to rise to the size of the occasion. This was sufficiently shown in the remark of the head of that firm to me a few months later, a remark which I shall refer to and quote in its proper place.</p>
				<p>I told General Grant that the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Century</i> offer was simply absurd and should not be considered for an instant.</p>
				<p>I forgot to mention that the rough draft made two propositions⁠—one at l0-percent royalty, and the other the offer of <em>half the profits on the book</em>, after subtracting <em>every sort of expense connected with it</em>, including <em>office rent, clerk hire, advertising</em>, and <em>everything else</em>, a most complicated arrangement and one which no businesslike author would accept in preference to a 10-percent royalty. They manifestly regarded 10-percent and half profits as the same thing⁠—which shows that these innocent geese expected the book to sell only 12,000 or 15,000 copies.</p>
				<p>I told the general that I could tell him exactly what he ought to receive; that, if he accepted a royalty, it ought to be 20 percent on the retail price of the book, or, if he preferred the partnership policy, then he ought to have 70 percent of the profits on each volume, over and above <em>the mere cost of making</em> that volume. I said that if he would place these terms before the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Century</i> people they would accept them, but if they were afraid to accept them he would simply need to offer them to any great publishing house in the country, and not one would decline them. If any should decline them, let <em>me</em> have the book. I was publishing my own book, under the business name of Charles L. Webster &amp; <abbr>Co.</abbr>, I being the company, and Webster being my business man, on a salary, with a one-tenth interest, and I had what I believed to be much the best equipped subscription establishment in the country.</p>
				<p>I wanted the general’s book, and I wanted it very much, but I had very little expectation of getting it. I supposed that he would lay these new propositions before the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Century</i> people, that they would accept immediately, and that there the matter would end; for the general evidently felt under great obligations to the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Century</i> people for saving him from the grip of poverty by paying him $1,500 for three magazine articles which were well worth $100,000, and he seemed wholly unable to free himself from this sense of obligation; whereas, to my mind, he ought rather to have considered the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Century</i> people under very high obligations to him, not only for making them a present of $100,000, but for procuring for them a great and desirable series of war articles from the other heroes of the war, which, according to Gilder, they could never have got their hands on if he had declined to write.</p>
				<p>I now went away on a long Western tour on the platform, but Webster continued to call at the general’s house and watch the progress of events.</p>
				<p><abbr>Col.</abbr> Fred Grant was strongly opposed to letting the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Century</i> people have the book, and was, at the same time, as strongly in favor of my having it.</p>
				<p>The general’s first magazine article had immediately added 50,000 names to their list of subscribers and thereby established the fact that the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Century</i> people would still have been the gainers if they had paid General Grant $50,000 for the articles⁠—for the reason that they could expect to keep the most of these subscribers for several years, and, consequently, get a profit out of them in the end of $100,000 at least.</p>
				<p>Besides this increased circulation, the number of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Century</i>’s advertising pages at once doubled, a huge addition to the magazine’s cash income in itself⁠—(an addition of $25,000 a <em>month</em>, as I estimate it from what I have paid them for one-fifth of a page for six months⁠—$1,800).</p>
				<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Century</i> people had eventually added to the original check of $1,500 a check for a thousand dollars, after perceiving that they were going to make a fortune out of the first of the three articles.</p>
				<p>This seemed a fine liberality to General Grant, who was the most simple-hearted of all men; but, to me, it seemed merely another exhibition of incomparable nonsense, as the added check ought to have been for $30,000 instead of $1,000. <abbr>Col.</abbr> Fred Grant looked upon the matter just as I did, and had determined to keep the book out of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Century</i> people’s hands if possible. This action merely confirmed and hardened him in his purpose.</p>
				<p>While I was in the West, propositions from publishers came to General Grant daily, and these propositions had a common form⁠—to wit: “only tell us what your best offer is and we stand ready to make a better one.”</p>
				<p>These things had their effect. The general began to perceive, from these various views, that he had narrowly escaped making a very bad bargain for his book; and now he began to incline toward me, for the reason, no doubt, that I had been the accidental cause of stopping that bad bargain.</p>
				<p>He called in George W. Childs of Philadelphia and laid the whole matter before him and asked his advice. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Childs said to me afterward that it was plain to be seen that the general, on the score of friendship, was so distinctly inclined toward me that the advice which would please him best would be advice to turn the book over to me.</p>
				<p>He counseled the general to send competent people to examine into my capacity to properly publish the book and into the capacity of the other competitors for the book, and (this was done at my own suggestion⁠—Fred Grant being present) if they found that my house was as well equipped in all ways as the others, that he give the book to me.</p>
				<p>The general sent persons selected by a couple of great law firms (Clarence Seward’s was one) to make examinations, and <abbr>Col.</abbr> Fred Grant made similar examinations for himself personally.</p>
				<p>The verdict in these several cases was that my establishment was as competent to make a success of the book as was that of any of the firms competing.</p>
				<p>The result was that the contract was drawn and the book was placed in my hands.</p>
				<p>In the course of one of my business talks with General Grant he asked me if I felt sure I could sell 25,000 copies of his book, and he asked the question in such a way that I suspected that the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Century</i> people had intimated that that was about the number of the books that they thought ought to sell.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-6" id="noteref-6" epub:type="noteref">6</a></p>
				<p>I replied that the best way for a man to express an opinion in such a case was to put it in money⁠—therefore, I would make this offer: if he would give me the book I would advance him the sum of $25,000 on each volume the moment the manuscript was placed in my hands, adding that I would draw the first check immediately. If I never got the $50,000 back again, out of the future copyrights due, I would never ask him to return any part of the money to me.</p>
				<p>The suggestion seemed to <em>distress</em> him. He said he could not think of taking in advance any sum of money large or small which the publisher would not be absolutely sure of getting back again. Some time afterward, when the contract was being drawn and the question was whether it should be 20-percent royalty or 70 percent of the profits, he inquired which of the two propositions would be the best all round. I sent Webster to tell him that the 20-percent royalty would be the best for him, for the reason that it was the surest, the simplest, the easiest to keep track of, and, better still, would pay him a trifle more, no doubt, than with the other plan.</p>
				<p>He thought the matter over and then said in substance that by the 20-percent plan he would be sure to make, while the publisher might possibly lose; therefore, he would not have the royalty plan, but the 70-percent-profit plan, since, if there were profits, he could not then get them all, but the publisher would be sure to get 30 percent of it.</p>
				<p>This was just like General Grant. It was absolutely impossible for him to entertain for a moment any proposition which might prosper him at the risk of any other man.</p>
				<p>After the contract had been drawn and signed, I remembered I had offered to advance the general some money and that he had said he might possibly need $10,000 before the book issued. The circumstance had been forgotten and was not in the contract, but I had the luck to remember it before leaving town; so I went back and told <abbr>Col.</abbr> Fred Grant to draw upon Webster for the $10,000 whenever it should be wanted.</p>
				<p>That was the only thing forgotten in the contract, and it was now rectified and everything was smooth.</p>
				<p>And now I come to a circumstance which I have never spoken of and which cannot be known for many years to come, for this paragraph must not be published until the mention of so private a matter cannot offend any living person.</p>
				<p>The contract was drawn by the great law firm of Alexander &amp; Green, on my part, and Clarence Seward, son of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lincoln’s Secretary of State, on the part of General Grant.</p>
				<p>Appended to the contract was a transfer of the book to General Grant’s wife, and the transfer from her to my firm for the consideration of $1,000 in hand paid.</p>
				<p>This was to prevent the general’s creditors from seizing the proceeds of the book.</p>
				<p>Webster had said, “Yes,” when the sum named was a thousand dollars, and, after he had signed the contract and was leaving the law office, he mentioned, incidentally, that the thousand dollars was of course a mere formality in such a paper, and meant nothing. But <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Seward took him privately aside and said, “No, it means just what it says⁠—<em>for the general’s family have not a penny in the house and they are waiting at this moment with lively anxiety for that small sum of money</em>.”</p>
				<p>Webster was astonished. He drew a check at once and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Seward gave it to a messenger boy and told him to take it swiftly⁠—by the speediest route⁠—to General Grant’s house, and not let the grass grow under his feet.</p>
				<p>It was a shameful thing that the man who had saved this country and its government from destruction should still be in a position where so small a sum⁠—so trivial an amount⁠—as $1,000 could be looked upon as a godsend. Everybody knew that the general was in reduced circumstances, but what a storm would have gone up all over the land if the people could have known that his poverty had reached such a point as this.</p>
				<p>The newspapers all over the land had been lauding the princely generosity of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Century</i> people in paying General Grant the goodly sum of $1,500 for three magazine articles, whereas, if they had paid him the amount which was his just due for them, he would still have been able to keep his carriage and not have been worrying about $1,000. Neither the newspapers nor the public were probably aware that fifty-five years earlier the publishers of an annual in London had offered little Tom Moore twice $1,500 for two articles and had told him to make them long or short and to write about whatever he pleased. The difference between the financial value of any article written by Tom Moore in his best day and a war article written by General Grant in these days was about as one to fifty.</p>
				<p>To go back awhile. After being a month or two in the West, during the winter of 1884⁠–⁠85, I returned to the East, reaching New York about the 20th of February.</p>
				<p>No agreement had at that time been reached as to the contract, but I called at General Grant’s house simply to inquire after his health, for I had seen reports in the newspapers that he had been sick and confined to his house for some time.</p>
				<p>The last time I had been at his house he told me that he had stopped smoking because of the trouble in his throat, which the physicians had said would be quickest cured in that way. But while I was in the West the newspapers had reported that this throat affection was believed to be in the nature of a cancer. However, on the morning of my arrival in New York the newspapers had reported that the physicians had said that the general was a great deal better than he had been and was getting along very comfortably. So, when I called at the house, I went up to the general’s room and shook hands and said I was very glad he was so much better and so well along on the road to perfect health again.</p>
				<p>He smiled and said, “If it were only true.”</p>
				<p>Of course I was both surprised and discomfited, and asked his physician, Doctor Douglas, if the general were in truth not progressing as well as I had supposed. He intimated that the reports were rather rose colored and that this affection was no doubt a cancer.</p>
				<p>I am an excessive smoker, and I said to the general that some of the rest of us must take warning by his case, but Doctor Douglas spoke up and said that this result must not be attributed altogether to smoking. He said it was probable that it had its <em>origin</em> in excessive smoking; but that was not the certain reason of its manifesting itself at this time; that more than likely the real reason was the general’s distress of mind and yearlong depression of spirit, arising from the failure of the Grant &amp; Ward firm.</p>
				<p>This remark started the general at once to talking; and I found then and afterward that, when he did not care to talk about any other subject, he was always ready and willing to talk about that one.</p>
				<p>He told what I have before related about the robberies perpetrated upon him and upon all the Grant connection, by this man Ward whom he had so thoroughly trusted, <em>but he never uttered a phrase concerning Ward which an outraged adult might not have uttered concerning an offending child</em>. He spoke as a man speaks who has been deeply wronged and humiliated and betrayed; but he never used a venomous expression or one of a vengeful nature.</p>
				<p>As for myself, I was inwardly boiling all the time; I was scalping Ward, flaying him alive, breaking him on the wheel, pounding him to jelly, and cursing him with all the profanity known to the one language that I am acquainted with, and helping it out, in times of difficulty and distress, with odds and ends of profanity drawn from the two other languages of which I have a limited knowledge.</p>
				<p>He told his story with deep feeling in his voice, but with no betrayal upon his countenance of what was going on in his heart. He could depend upon that countenance of his in all emergencies. It always stood by him. It never betrayed him.</p>
				<p>[July 1st or 2nd, at Mount McGregor, 1885, about three weeks before the general’s death, Buck Grant and I sat talking an hour to each other across the general’s lap, just to keep him company⁠—he had only to listen. The news had just come that that Marine Bank man (Ward’s pal⁠—what <em>was</em> that scoundrel’s name?) had been sent up for ten years. Buck Grant said the bitterest things about him he could frame his tongue to; I was about as bitter myself. The general listened for some time, then reached for his pad and pencil and wrote, “He was not as bad as the other”⁠—meaning Ward. It was his only comment. Even his <em>writing</em> looked gentle.]</p>
				<p>While he was talking, Colonel Grant said, “Father is letting you see that the Grant family are a pack of fools, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Clemens!”</p>
				<p>The general combated that statement. He said, in substance, that facts could be produced which would show that when Ward laid siege to a man, that man would turn out to be a fool, too⁠—as much of a fool as any Grant; that all men were fools if the being successfully beguiled by Ward was proof, by itself, that the man was a fool. He began to present instances. He said (in effect) that nobody would call the president of the Erie Railroad a fool, yet Ward beguiled him to the extent of $800,000, robbed him of every cent of it. He mentioned another man who could not be called a fool; yet Ward had beguiled that man out of more than half a million dollars and had given him nothing in return for it. He instanced a man with a name something like Fisher, though that was not the name, whom he said nobody could call a fool; on the contrary a man who had made himself very rich by being sharper and smarter than other people and who always prided himself upon his smartness and upon the fact that he could not be fooled, he could not be deceived by anybody; but what did Ward do in his case? He fooled him into buying a portion of a mine belonging to ex-Senator Chaffee⁠—a property which was not for sale, which Ward could produce no authority for selling⁠—yet he got out of <em>that</em> man $300,000 in cash, without the passage of a single piece of paper or a line of writing to show that the sale had been made. This man came to the office of Grant &amp; Ward every day for a good while, and talked with Ward about the prospects of that rich mine (and it <em>was</em> very rich), and these two would pass directly by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Chaffee and go into the next room and talk. You would think that a man of his reputation for shrewdness would at some time or other have concluded to ask <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Chaffee a question or two; but, no, Ward had told this man that Chaffee did not want to be known in the transaction at all, that he must seem to be at Grant &amp; Ward’s office on other business, and that he must not venture to speak to Chaffee or the whole business would be spoiled.</p>
				<p><em>There</em> was a man who prided himself on being a smart business man, and yet Ward robbed him of $300,000 without giving him a scrap of anything to show that the transaction had taken place, and today that man is not among the prosecutors of Ward at all, for the reason, perhaps, that he would rather lose all of that money than to have the fact get out that he was deceived in so childish a way.</p>
				<p>General Grant mentioned another man who was very wealthy, whom no one would venture to call a fool, either businesswise or otherwise, yet this man came into the office one day and said: “Ward, here is my check for $50,000. I have no use for it at present; I am going to make a flying trip to Europe. Turn it over for me; see what you can do with it.” Some time afterward I was in the office when this gentleman returned from his trip and presented himself. He asked Ward if he had accomplished anything with that money? Ward said, “Just wait a moment,” went to his books, turned over a page, mumbled to himself a few moments, drew a check for $250,000, handed it to this man with the air of a person who had really accomplished nothing worth talking of! The man stared at the check a moment, handed it back to Ward, and said, “That is plenty good enough for me; set that hen again,” and he went out of the place. It was the last he ever saw of any of that money.</p>
				<p>I had been discovering fools all along when the general was talking, but this instance brought me to my senses. I put myself in this fellow’s place and confessed that if I had been in that fellow’s clothes it was a hundred to one that I would have done the very thing that he had done, and I was thoroughly well aware that, at any rate, there was not a preacher or a widow in Christendom who would not have done it; for these people are always seeking investments that pay illegitimately large sums; and they never, or seldom, stop to inquire into the nature of the business.</p>
				<p>When I was ready to go, <abbr>Col.</abbr> Fred Grant went downstairs with me, and stunned me by telling me, confidentially, that the physicians were trying to keep his father’s real condition from him, but that in fact they considered him to be under sentence of death and that he would not be likely to live more than a fortnight or three weeks longer.</p>
				<p>This was about the 21st of February, 1885.</p>
				<p>After the 21st of February, General Grant busied himself, daily, as much as his strength would allow, in revising the manuscript of his book. It was read to him by Colonel Grant, very carefully, and he made the corrections as he went along. He was losing valuable time because only one-half or two-thirds of the second and last volume was as yet written. However, he was more anxious that what was written should be <em>absolutely correct</em> than that he should finish the book in an incorrect form, and then find himself unable to correct it. His memory was superb, and nearly any other man with such a memory would have been satisfied to trust it. Not so the general. No matter how sure he was of the fact or the date, he would never let it go until he had verified it with the official records. This constant and painstaking searching of the records cost a great deal of time, but it was not wasted. Everything stated as a fact in General Grant’s book may be accepted with entire confidence as being thoroughly trustworthy.</p>
				<p>Speaking of his memory, what a wonderful machine it was! He told me one day that he never made a report of the battles of the Wilderness until they were all over and he was back in Washington. Then he sat down and made a full report from memory, and, when it was finished, examined the reports of his subordinates, and found that he had made hardly an error. To be exact, he said he had made two errors.</p>
				<p>The general lost some more time in one other way. Three <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Century</i> articles had been written and paid for, but he had during the summer before promised to write a fourth one. He had written it in a rough draft, but it had remained unfinished.</p>
				<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Century</i> people had advertised these articles and were now fearful that the general would never be able to complete them. By this time news of the general’s failing health had got abroad and the newspapers were full of reports about his perilous condition. The <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Century</i> people called several times to get the fourth article, and this hurt and offended <abbr>Col.</abbr> Fred Grant, because he knew that they were aware, as was all the world, that his father was considered to be in a dying condition. Colonel Grant thought that they ought to show more consideration⁠—more humanity. By fits and starts, the general worked at that article whenever his failing strength would permit him, and was determined to finish it, if possible, <em>because his promise had been given and he would in no way depart from it while any slight possibility remained of fulfilling it</em>. I asked if there was no contract or no understanding as to what was to be paid by the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Century</i> people for the article. He said there was not. “Then,” I said, “charge them $20,000 for it. It is well worth it⁠—worth double the money. Charge them this sum for it in its unfinished condition and let them have it, and tell them that it will be worth still more in case the general shall be able to complete it. This may modify their ardor somewhat and bring you a rest.” He was not willing to put so large a price upon it, but thought that if he gave it to them he might require them to pay $5,000. It was plain that the modesty of the family in money matters was indestructible.</p>
				<p>Just about this time I was talking to General Badeau there one day. When I saw a pile of typewriter manuscript on the table and picked up the first page and began to read it. I saw that it was an account of the siege of Vicksburg. I counted a page and there were about three hundred words on the page; 18,000 or 20,000 words altogether.</p>
				<p>General Badeau said it was one of the three articles written by General Grant for the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Century</i>.</p>
				<p>I said, “Then they have no sort of right to require the fourth article, for there is matter enough in this one to make two or three ordinary magazine articles.” The copy of this and the other two articles were at this moment in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Century</i>’s safe; the fourth-article agreement was therefore most amply fulfilled already, without an additional article; yet the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Century</i> people considered that the contract would not be fulfilled without the fourth article, and so insisted upon having it. At the ordinary price paid me for <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Century</i> articles, this Vicksbury article, if I had written it, would have been worth about $700. Therefore, the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Century</i> people had paid General Grant no more than they would have paid me; and this <em>including</em> the $1,000 gratuity which they had given him.</p>
				<p>If the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Century</i> people knew anything at all, they knew that a single page of General Grant’s manuscript was worth more than a hundred of mine. They were honest, honorable, and good-hearted people according to their lights, and if anybody could have made them see differently they would have rectified the wrong. But all the eloquence that I was able to pour out upon them, went for nothing, utterly nothing. They still thought that they had been quite generous to the general and were not able to see the matter in any other light.</p>
				<p>Afterward, at Mount McGregor, they consented to give up half of the Vicksburg article; and they did; they gave up <em>more</em> than half of it⁠—cut it from twenty-two galleys down to nine, and only the nine will appear in the magazine, and they added $2,500 to the $2,500 already paid. Those people could learn to be as fair and liberal as anybody if they had the right schooling.</p>
				<p>Some time after the contract for General Grant’s book was completed, I found that nothing but a verbal understanding existed between General Grant and the Century Company giving General Grant permission to use his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Century</i> articles in his book. There is a law of custom which gives an author the privilege of using his magazine articles in any way he pleases, after it shall have appeared in the magazine; and this law of custom is so well established that an author never expects to have any difficulty about getting a magazine copyright transferred to him, whenever he shall ask for it, with the purpose in view of putting the article in a book. But in the present case I was afraid that the Century Company might fall back upon their legal rights and ignore the law of custom, in which case we should be debarred from using General Grant’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Century</i> articles in his book⁠—an awkward state of things, because he was now too sick a man to rewrite them. It was necessary that something should be done in this matter, and done at once.</p>
				<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Seward, General Grant’s lawyer, was a good deal disturbed when he found that there was no writing. But I was not. I believed that the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Century</i> people could be relied upon to carry out any verbal agreement which they had made. The only thing I feared was that their idea of the verbal agreement, and General Grant’s idea of it, might not coincide. So I went back to the general’s house and got <abbr>Col.</abbr> Fred Grant to write down what he understood the verbal agreement to be, and this piece of writing he read to General Grant, who said it was correct, and then signed it with his own hand, a feeble and trembling signature, but recognizable as his.</p>
				<p>Then I sent for Webster and our lawyer, and we three went to the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Century</i> office, where we found Roswell Smith (the head man of the company) and several of the editors. I stated my case plainly and simply and found that their understanding and General Grant’s were identical; so the difficulty was at an end at once and we proceeded to draw a writing to cover the thing.</p>
				<p>When the business was finished, or perhaps in the course of it, I made another interesting discovery.</p>
				<p>I was already aware that the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Century</i> people were going to bring out all their war articles in book form, eventually, General Grant’s among the number; but, as I knew what a small price had been paid to the general for his articles, I had a vague notion that he would receive a further payment for the use of them in their book⁠—a remuneration which an author customarily receives, in our day, by another unwritten law of custom. But when I spoke of this, to my astonishment they told me that they had bought and paid for every one of these war articles with the distinct understanding that that first payment was the last. In confirmation of this amazing circumstance, they brought out a receipt which General Grant had signed, and therein it distinctly appeared that each $500 not only paid for the use of the article printed in the magazine, <em>but also in the subsequent book</em>!</p>
				<p>One thing was quite clear to me: if we consider the value of those articles to that book, we must grant that the general was paid very much less than nothing at all for their issue in the magazine.</p>
				<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Century</i> people didn’t blush, and, therefore, it is plain that they considered the transaction fair and legitimate; and I believe myself that they had no idea that they were doing an unfair thing. It was easily demonstrable that they were buying ten-dollar gold pieces from General Grant at twenty-five cents apiece, and I think it was as easily demonstrable that they did not know that there was anything unfair about it.</p>
				<p>Roswell Smith said to me, with the glad air of a man who has stuck a nail in his foot, “I’m glad you’ve got the general’s book, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Clemens, and glad there was somebody with courage enough to take it, under the circumstances. What do you think the general wanted to require of me?”</p>
				<p>“What?”</p>
				<p>“<i>He wanted me to insure a sale of twenty-five thousand sets of his book! I wouldn’t risk such a guaranty on any book that ever was published.</i>”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-7" id="noteref-7" epub:type="noteref">7</a></p>
				<p>I did not say anything, but I thought a good deal. This was one more evidence that the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Century</i> people had no more just idea of the value of the book than as many children might be expected to have. At this present writing (May 25, 1885) we have not advertised General Grant’s book in any way; we have not spent a dollar in advertising of any kind; we have not even given notice by circular or otherwise that we are ready to receive applications from book agents; and yet, today, we have bona fide orders for 100,000 sets of the book⁠—that is to say, 200,000 single volumes; and these orders are from men who have bonded themselves to take and pay for them, and who have also laid before us the most trustworthy evidence that they are financially able to carry out their contracts. The territory which these men have taken is only about one-fourth of the area of the Northern states. We have also under consideration applications for 50,000 sets more; and although we have confidence in the energy and ability of the men who have made these applications, we have not closed with them because, as yet, we are not sufficiently satisfied as to their financial strength.</p>
				<p>When it became known that the general’s book had fallen into my hands, the New York <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">World</i> and a Boston paper (I think the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Herald</i>) came out at once with the news; and in both instances the position was taken that, by some sort of superior underhanded smartness, I had taken an unfair advantage of the confiding simplicity of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Century</i> people and got the book away from them⁠—a book which they had the right to consider their property, inasmuch as the terms of its publication had been mutually agreed upon and the contract covering it was on the point of being signed by General Grant when I put in my meddling appearance.</p>
				<p>None of the statements of these two papers was correct, but the Boston paper’s account was considered to be necessarily correct, for the reason that it was furnished by the sister of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gilder, editor of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Century</i>, so there was considerable newspaper talk about my improper methods; but nobody seemed to have wit enough to discover that if one gouger <em>had</em> captured the general’s book, here was evidence that he had only prevented another gouger from getting it, since the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Century</i>’s terms were distinctly mentioned in the Boston paper’s account as being <em>10-percent royalty</em>. No party observed that, and nobody commented upon it. It was taken for granted all round that General Grant would have signed that 10-percent contract without being grossly cheated. It is my settled policy to allow newspapers to make as many misstatements about me or my affairs as they like; therefore I had no mind to contradict either of these newspapers or explain my side of the case in any way. But a reporter came to our house at Hartford (from one of the editors of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Courant</i>) to ask me for my side of the matter for use in the Associated Press dispatches. I dictated a short paragraph in which I said that the statement made in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">World</i>, that there was a coolness between the Century Company and General Grant, and that, in consequence of it, the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Century</i> would not publish any more articles by General Grant, notwithstanding the fact that they had advertised them far and wide, was not true. I said there was no coolness and no ground for coolness; that the contract for the book had been open for all competitors; that I had put in my application and had asked the general to state its terms to the other applicants in order that he might thereby be enabled to get the best terms possible; that I had got the book, eventually, but by no underhand or unfair method. The statement I made was concise and brief and contained nothing offensive. It was sent over the wires to the Associated Press headquarters in New York, but it was not <em>issued</em> by that concern. It did not appear in print. I inquired why, and was told that, although it was a piece of news of quite universal interest, it was also more or less of an advertisement for the book⁠—a thing I had not thought of before. I was also told that if I had had a friend round about the Associated Press office, I could have had that thing published all over the country for a reasonable bribe. I wondered if that were true. I wondered if so great and important a concern dealt in that sort of thing.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="gerhardt-and-the-grant-bust">
				<header>
					<h4 epub:type="title">Gerhardt<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-8" id="noteref-8" epub:type="noteref">8</a> and the Grant Bust</h4>
					<p class="date">Dictated in 1885</p>
				</header>
				<p>I will make a diversion here, and get back upon my track again later.</p>
				<p>While I was away with <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. W.</abbr> Cable, giving public readings in the theaters, lecture halls, skating rinks, jails, and churches of the country, the travel was necessarily fatiguing, and, therefore, I ceased from writing letters excepting to my wife and children. This foretaste of heaven, this relief from the fret of letter-answering, was delightful; but it finally left me in the dark concerning things which I ought to have been acquainted with at the moment.</p>
				<p>Among these the affairs of Karl Gerhardt, the young artist, should be mentioned.</p>
				<p>I had started out on this reading pilgrimage the day after the presidential election; that is to say, I had started on the 5th of November, and had visited my home only once between that time and the 2nd of March following.</p>
				<p>During all these four months, Gerhardt had been waiting for a verdict of a dilatory committee, concerning a Nathan Hale statue, and had taken it out in waiting; that is to say, he had sat still and done nothing to earn his bread. He had been tirelessly diligent in asking for work in the line of his art, and had used all possible means in that direction; he had written letters to every man he could hear of who was likely to need a mortuary monument for himself, or his friends, or acquaintances, and had also applied for the chance of a competition for a soldiers’ monument⁠—for all things of this sort⁠—but always without success; the natural result, as his name was not known. He had no reputation.</p>
				<p>Once, <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. Q. A.</abbr> Ward, in speaking of his early struggles to get a status as a sculptor, had told me that he had made his beginning by hanging around the studios of sculptors of repute and picking up odd jobs of journey work in them, for the sake of the bread he could gain in that way.</p>
				<p>I may as well say here, and be done with it, that my connection with Gerhardt had very little sentiment in it, from my side of the house; and no romance. I took hold of his case, in the first place, solely because I had become convinced that he had it in him to become a very capable sculptor. I was not adopting a child, I was not adding a member to the family, I was merely taking upon myself a common duty⁠—the duty of helping a man who was not able to help himself. I never expected him to be grateful, I never expected him to be thankful⁠—my experience of men had long ago taught me that one of the surest ways of begetting an enemy was to do some stranger an act of kindness which should lay upon him the irritating sense of an obligation. Therefore my connection with Gerhardt had nothing sentimental or romantic about it. I told him in the first place that if the time should ever come when he could pay back to me the money expended upon him, and pay it without inconvenience to himself, I should expect it at his hands, and that, when it <em>was</em> paid, I should consider the account entirely requited⁠—sentiment and all; that that act would leave him free from any obligation to me. It was well, all round, that things had taken that shape in the beginning, and had kept it, for if the foundation had been sentiment that sentiment might have grown sour.</p>
				<p>One evening Gerhardt appeared in the library and I hoped he had come to say he was getting along very well and was contented; so I was disappointed when he said he had come to show me a small bust he had been making, in clay, of General Grant, from a photograph. I was the more irritated for the reason that I had never seen a portrait of General Grant⁠—in oil, watercolors, crayon, steel, wood, photograph, plaster, marble, or any other material⁠—that was to me at all satisfactory; and, therefore, I could not expect that a person who had never even seen the general could accomplish anything worth considering in the way of a likeness of him.</p>
				<p>However, when he uncovered the bust my prejudices vanished at once.</p>
				<p>The thing was not correct in its details, yet it seemed to me to be a closer approach to a good likeness of General Grant than any one which I had ever seen before. Before uncovering it, Gerhardt had said he had brought it in the hope that I would show it to some member of the general’s family and get that member to point out its chief defects, for correction; but I had replied that I could not venture to do that, for there was a plenty of people to pester these folks without me adding myself to the number. But a glance at the bust had changed all that in an instant. I said I would go to New York in the morning and ask the family to look at the bust, and that he must come along to be within call in case they took enough interest in the matter to point out the defects.</p>
				<p>We reached the general’s house at one o’clock the next afternoon, and I left Gerhardt and the bust below and went upstairs to see the family.</p>
				<p>And now, for the first time, the thought came into my mind that perhaps I was doing a foolish thing; that the family must of necessity have been pestered with such matters as this so many times that the very mention of such a thing must be nauseating to them. However, I had started, and so I might as well finish. Therefore, I said I had a young artist downstairs who had been making a small bust of the general from a photograph, and I wished they would look at it, if they were willing to do me that kindness.</p>
				<p>Jesse Grant’s wife spoke up with eagerness and said, “Is it the artist who made the bust of you that is in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Huckleberry Finn</i>?” I said, “Yes.” She said, with great animation, “How good it was of you, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Clemens, to think of that!” She expressed this lively gratitude to me in various ways until I began to feel somehow a great sense of merit in having originated this noble idea of having a bust of General Grant made by so excellent an artist. I will not do my sagacity the discredit of saying that I did anything to remove or modify this impression that I had originated the idea and carried it out to its present state through my own ingenuity and diligence.</p>
				<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Jesse Grant added, “How strange it is; only two nights ago I dreamed that I was looking at your bust in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Huckleberry Finn</i> and thinking how nearly perfect it was, and then I thought that I conceived the idea of going to you and asking you if you could not hunt up that artist and get him to make a bust of father!”</p>
				<p>Things were going on very handsomely!</p>
				<p>The persons present were <abbr>Col.</abbr> Fred Grant, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Jesse Grant, and Doctor Douglas.</p>
				<p>I went down for Gerhardt and he brought up the bust and uncovered it. All of the family present exclaimed over the excellence of the likeness, and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Jesse Grant expended some more unearned gratitude upon me.</p>
				<p>The family began to discuss the details, and then checked themselves and begged Gerhardt’s pardon for criticizing. Of course, he said that their criticisms were exactly what he wanted and begged them to go on. The general’s wife said that in that case they would be glad to point out what seemed to them inaccuracies, but that he must not take their speeches as being criticisms upon his art at all. They found two inaccuracies; in the shape of the nose and the shape of the forehead. All were agreed that the forehead was wrong, but there was a lively dispute about the nose. Some of those present contended that the nose was nearly right⁠—the others contended that it was distinctly wrong. The general’s wife knelt on the ottoman to get a clearer view of the bust, and the others stood about her⁠—all talking at once. Finally, the general’s wife said, hesitatingly, with the mien of one who is afraid he is taking a liberty and asking too much, “If <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gerhardt could see the general’s nose and forehead, himself, that would dispose of this dispute at once.” Finally, “The general is in the next room. Would <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gerhardt mind going in there and making the correction himself?”</p>
				<p>Things were indeed progressing handsomely!</p>
				<p>Of course, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gerhardt lost no time in expressing his willingness.</p>
				<p>While the controversy was going on concerning the nose and the forehead, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Fred Grant joined the group, and then, presently, each of the three ladies, in turn, disappeared for a few minutes, and came back with a handful of photographs and hand-painted miniatures of the general.</p>
				<p>These pictures had been made in every quarter of the world. One of them had been painted in Japan. But, good as many of these pictures were, they were worthless as evidence, for the reason that they contradicted one another in every detail.</p>
				<p>The photograph apparatus had lied as distinctly and as persistently as had the hands of the miniature-artists. No two noses were alike and no two foreheads were alike.</p>
				<p>We stepped into the general’s room⁠—all but General Badeau and Doctor Douglas.</p>
				<p>The general was stretched out in a reclining chair with his feet supported upon an ordinary chair. He was muffled up in dressing gowns and afghans, with his black woolen skullcap on his head.</p>
				<p>The ladies took the skullcap off and began to discuss his nose and his forehead, and they made him turn this way and that way and the other way, to get different views and profiles of his features. He took it all patiently and made no complaint. He allowed them to pull and haul him about, in their own affectionate fashion, without a murmur.</p>
				<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Fred Grant, who is very beautiful and of the most gentle and loving character, was very active in this service, and very deft, with her graceful hands, in arranging and rearranging the general’s head for inspection, and repeatedly called attention to the handsome shape of his head⁠—a thing which reminds me that Gerhardt had picked up an old plug hat of the general’s downstairs, and had remarked upon the perfect oval shape of the inside of it, this oval being so uniform that the wearer of the hat could never be able to know, by the feel of it, whether he had it right end in front or wrong end in front; whereas the average man’s head is broad at one end and narrow at the other.</p>
				<p>The general’s wife placed him in various positions, none of which satisfied her, and finally she went to him and said: “Ulyss! Ulyss! Can’t you put your feet to the floor?” He did so at once and straightened himself up.</p>
				<p>During all this time the general’s face wore a pleasant, contented, and I should say benignant, aspect, but he never opened his lips once. As had often been the case before, so now his silence gave ample room to guess at what was passing in his mind⁠—and to take it out in guessing. I will remark, in passing, that the general’s hands were very thin, and they showed, far more than did his face, how his long siege of confinement and illness and insufficient food had wasted him. He was at this time suffering great and increasing pain from the cancer at the root of his tongue, but there was nothing ever discoverable in the expression of his face to betray this fact, as long as he was awake. When asleep, his face would take advantage of him and make revelations.</p>
				<p>At the end of fifteen minutes, Gerhardt said he believed he could correct the defects now. So we went back to the other room.</p>
				<p>Gerhardt went to work on the clay image, everybody standing round, observing and discussing with the greatest interest.</p>
				<p>Presently the general astonished us by appearing there, clad in his wraps and supporting himself in a somewhat unsure way upon a cane. He sat down on the sofa and said he could sit there if it would be for the advantage of the artist.</p>
				<p>But his wife would not allow that. She said that he might catch cold. She was for hurrying him back at once to his invalid chair. He succumbed and started back, but at the door he turned and said:</p>
				<p>“Then can’t <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gerhardt bring the clay in here and work?”</p>
				<p>This was several hundred times better fortune than Gerhardt could have dreamed of. He removed his work to the general’s room at once. The general stretched himself out in his chair, but said that if that position would not do, he would sit up. Gerhardt said it would do very well indeed, especially if it were more comfortable to the sitter than any other would be.</p>
				<p>The general watched Gerhardt’s swift and noiseless fingers for some time with manifest interest in his face, and no doubt this novelty was a valuable thing to one who had spent so many weeks that were tedious with sameness and unemphasized with change or diversion. By and by, one eyelid began to droop occasionally; then everybody stepped out of the room, excepting Gerhardt and myself, and I moved to the rear, where I would be out of sight and not be a disturbing element.</p>
				<p>Harrison, the general’s old colored body servant, came in presently, and remained awhile, watching Gerhardt, and then broke out, with great zeal and decision:</p>
				<p>“That’s the general! Yes, sir, that’s the general! Mind! I tell you that’s the general!”</p>
				<p>Then he went away and the place became absolutely silent.</p>
				<p>Within a few minutes afterward the general was sleeping, and for two hours he continued to sleep tranquilly, the serenity of his face disturbed only at intervals by a passing wave of pain. It was the first sleep he had had for several weeks uninduced by narcotics.</p>
				<p>To my mind this bust, completed at this sitting, has in it more of General Grant than can be found in any other likeness of him that has ever been made since he was a famous man. I think it may rightly be called the best portrait of General Grant that is in existence. It has also a feature which must always be a remembrancer to this nation of what the general was passing through during the long weeks of that spring. For into the clay image went the pain which he was enduring, but which did not appear in his face when he was awake. Consequently, the bust has about it a suggestion of patient and brave and manly suffering which is infinitely touching.</p>
				<p>At the end of two hours General Badeau entered abruptly and spoke to the general, and this woke him up. But for this interruption he might have slept as much longer, possibly.</p>
				<p>Gerhardt worked on as long as it was light enough to work, and then he went away. He was to come again, and did come the following day; but at the last moment <abbr>Col.</abbr> Fred Grant would not permit another sitting. He said that the face was so nearly perfect that he was afraid to allow it to be touched again, lest some of the excellence might be refined out of it, instead of adding more excellence to it. He called attention to an oil painting on the wall downstairs and asked if we knew that man. We couldn’t name him⁠—had never seen his face before. “Well,” said Colonel Grant, “that was a perfect portrait of my father once. It was given up by all the family to be the best that had ever been made of him. We were entirely satisfied with it, but the artist, unhappily, was not; he wanted ‘to do a stroke or two to make it absolutely perfect’ and he insisted on taking it back with him. After he had made those finishing touches it didn’t resemble my father or anyone else. We took it, and have always kept it as a curiosity. But with that lesson behind us we will save this bust from a similar fate.”</p>
				<p>He allowed Gerhardt to work at the hair, however; he said he might expend as much of his talent on that as he pleased, but must stop there.</p>
				<p>Gerhardt finished the hair to his satisfaction, but never touched the face again. Colonel Grant required Gerhardt to promise that he would take every pains with the clay bust, and then return it to him, to keep, as soon as he had taken a mold from it. This was done.</p>
				<p>Gerhardt prepared the clay as well as he could for permanent preservation and gave it to Colonel Grant.</p>
				<p>Up to the present day, May 22, 1885, no later likeness of General Grant, of any kind, has been made from life, and if it shall chance to remain the last ever made of him from life, coming generations can properly be grateful that one so nearly perfect of him was made after the world learned his name.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-reverend-doctor-n-visits-general-grant">
				<header>
					<h4 epub:type="title">The Reverend Doctor N⁠⸺ Visits General Grant</h4>
					<p class="date">Dictated 1885</p>
				</header>
				<p>July 4, 1885.⁠—General Grant is still living this morning. Many a person between the two oceans lay hours awake last night listening for the booming of the fire bells which should speak to a nation in simultaneous voice and tell it its calamity. The bell strokes are to be thirty seconds apart and there will be sixty-three⁠—the general’s age. They will be striking in every town in the United States at the same moment⁠—the first time in the world’s history that the bells of a nation have tolled in unison⁠—beginning at the same moment and ending at the same moment.</p>
				<p>More than once, during two weeks, the nation stood watching with bated breath, expecting the news of General Grant’s death.</p>
				<p>The family, in their distress, desired spiritual help, and one Reverend Doctor N⁠⸺ was sent for to furnish it. N⁠⸺ had lately gone to California, where he had got a ten-thousand-dollar job to preach a funeral sermon over the son of an ex-governor, a millionaire; and a most remarkable sermon it was⁠—and worth the money. If N⁠⸺ got the facts right, neither he nor anybody else⁠—any ordinary human being⁠—was worthy to preach that youth’s funeral sermon, and it was manifest that one of the disciples ought to have been imported into California for the occasion. N⁠⸺ came on from California at once and began his ministration at the general’s bedside; and, if one might trust his daily reports, the general had conceived a new and perfect interest in spiritual things. It is fair to presume that the most of N⁠⸺’s daily reports originated in his own imagination.</p>
				<p><abbr>Col.</abbr> Fred Grant told me that his father was, in this matter, what he was in all matters and at all times⁠—that is to say, perfectly willing to have family prayers going on, or anything else that could be satisfactory to anybody, or increase anybody’s comfort in any way; but he also said that, while his father was a good man, and indeed as good as any man, Christian or otherwise, he was <em>not</em> a praying man.</p>
				<p>Some of the speeches put into General Grant’s mouth were to the last degree incredible to people who knew the general, since they were such gaudy and flowering misrepresentations of that plainspoken man’s utterances.</p>
				<p>About the 14th or 15th of April, Reverend <abbr>Mr.</abbr> N⁠⸺ reported that upon visiting the general in his sick chamber, the general pressed his hand and delivered himself of this astounding remark:</p>
				<p>“Thrice have I been in the shadow of the Valley of Death and thrice have I come out again.”</p>
				<p>General Grant never used flowers of speech, and, dead or alive, he never could have uttered anything like that, either as a quotation or otherwise.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-9" id="noteref-9" epub:type="noteref">9</a></p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
